Rapid Flagging of Antimicrobial Resistant Cases: Georgia Tech Research Institute’s (GTRI) Innovative Approach

Only a little over one decade ago, there was a deadly outbreak of 
carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae at the U.S. National Institutes of Health 
Clinical Center despite early infection control procedures. A study published in 
the [Science Translational Medicine](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3521604/) 
journal used whole genome sequencing to 
investigate the outbreak’s causes and transmission routes. In 2012, 
integrating K. pneumoniae isolates genomic data with mined epidemiologic data 
allowed the research team to retroactively infer transmission routes for the 18 
affected patients, 11 of whom died.

Modernized genomic surveillance systems of today like those being developed by 
the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI), in partnership with the Georgia 
Department of Public Health (GDPH), are rapidly moving toward near real-time 
analysis that could save lives. Researchers and engineers at GTRI are 
investigating how cases within robust antimicrobial resistant (AMR) genomic 
analysis pipelines can be flagged rapidly using modernized data linkage methods 
and the automation of manual, human-in-the-loop workflows.

GTRI researchers and software engineers of the Center for Applied Pathogen 
Epidemiology and Outbreak Response (CAPE) team are developing infrastructure 
built on Amazon Web Services, which leverages a data lakehouse and stores raw 
and cleaned data of various types and sources. Using automated data 
transformation, data outputs are cleaned, different sources are integrated, 
then ported back to the data lakehouse for human analysis by epidemiologists and 
further automated analysis as appropriate. In addition to the data lakehouse, 
the team envisions including a compute environment for the execution of analysis 
pipelines. The lakehouse and compute environment would provide an end-to-end 
data-to-analysis pipeline framework. The CAPE infrastructure is being built with 
discoverability in mind, taking into consideration the varying needs of 
different public health professionals, and intended to support numerous known 
use cases as well as those yet to be revealed.

One use case of CAPE’s infrastructure is the Antimicrobial Resistance Log (AR 
Log), which was developed to integrate various inputs from the data lakehouse 
for optimization of public health workflows leading to faster decision-making. 
Some examples of the sources being integrated into the AR Log include data 
from: the Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS), Georgia’s State 
Electronic Notifiable Disease Surveillance System (SendSS), and Excel 
spreadsheets containing non-standard fields, emphasizing the AR Log’s ability to 
process diverse formats, including raw data, which are translated to a common, 
query-able format. The AR Log’s Healthcare-Acquired Infections (HAI) analysis 
pipeline can be further tested and refined using a vast repository of sample 
data with known AMR genes retrieved from the National Center for Biotechnology 
Information (NCBI)’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA). Looking ahead, with continued 
collaboration made possible through the PGCoE, GTRI researchers envision that 
further innovations such as flagging cluster cases that are genomically similar 
with spatial-temporal considerations could make vast improvements for the 
timeliness, accuracy, and effectiveness of public health response in 
epidemiologic investigations.
